manifest: move optional modules to a submanifest and make them optional (#61505)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/contribute/external.rst

thus it is not automatically subject to the requirements of the previous
section.

Integration in main manifest file (west.yaml)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Integrating external code into the main :file:`west.yml` manifest file is
limited to code that is used by a Zephyr subsystem (libraries) or by a platform

> or drivers (HAL) or tooling needed to test or build Zephyr components.

Reviewer: How about adding some language that indicates the testing/support of integrated modules?  Something like "Modules in this group are validated by the CI, and verified working with each Zephyr release."

Integration as optional modules
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Standalone or loose integration of modules/projects without any incoming
dependencies shall be made optional and shall be kept standalone. Optional
projects that provide value to users directly and through a Zephyr subsystem or
platform shall be added to an optional manifest file that is filtered by
default. (:file:`submanifests/optional.yml`).

> Such optional projects might include samples and tests in their own repositories.

Reviewer: Similar thing here, but add language that the user should check the release notes of the module for compatibility with a specific Zephyr release.

Reviewer 2: Should stand-alone repos be manifest-modules?

Author: no, I do not think there is no needed for that and it does not add any value, simply `zephyr/module.yaml`

thus it is not automatically subject to the requirements of the previous
section.

Integration in main manifest file (west.yaml)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Integrating external code into the main :file:`west.yml` manifest file is
limited to code that is used by a Zephyr subsystem (libraries), by a platform,
drivers (HAL) or tooling needed to test or build Zephyr components.

The integration of modules in this group is validated by the Zephyr project CI,
and verified to be working with each Zephyr release.

Integration as optional modules

> +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Reviewer 3: nit: title needs alignment (why isn't Sphinx catching this :/)

Standalone or loose integration of modules/projects without any incoming
dependencies shall be made optional and shall be kept standalone. Optional
projects that provide value to users directly and through a Zephyr subsystem or
platform shall be added to an optional manifest file that is filtered by
default. (:file:`submanifests/optional.yml`).

Such optional projects might include samples and tests in their own repositories.

There shall not be any direct dependency added in the Zephyr code tree and all

> sample or test code shall be maintained within the module tree.

Reviewer 2: AFAICT this is the first time "module tree" is being introduced. I'm not sure what is meant by this.  Consider the following interpretations:

The sample or test code needs to be:

1. In the module repository;
2. In directories pointed to by module.yml;
3. In directories following the Zephyr directory tree structure;
4. In directory sub-trees dedicated to the Zephyr build system;

Once we get to the Zephyr directory tree structure in a module then the build system must support that tree being rooted in the same directory as `module.yml`. This means a module usually has code that is outside the Zephyr directory tree structure (clearly "out-of-tree"). 

We don't have an unambiguous term for code located in a Zephyr directory structure in a repository other than zephyr.git. What should it be called?

Reviewer 4: > AFAICT this is the first time "module tree" is being introduced. I'm not sure what is meant by this.

git repo? If that's all it is then "git repo" is much clearer.

West is git-only and AFAIK with no plan to support anything else any time soon.

Reviewer 2: "git repo" can also refer to `zephyr.git`, so that's not a very good option either.

For Zephyr, west is explicitly supposed to be optional, so its terms are not good either.

To someone brand new to Zephyr, "in-tree" very reasonably means anything/everything within a Zephyr directory structure, no matter which repository or which part of a repository it is in (e.g., example_application, hal/silabs, audio/sof (partially)).

Soon we'll have to talk about {component/file} within the "{module_name} module". Perhaps there is a natural extension of that pattern to cover every case.

Reviewer 4: > "git repo" can also refer to zephyr.git, so that's not a very good option either.

I meant "module's git repo" of course.

> For Zephyr, west is explicitly supposed to be optional, so its terms are not good either.

This PR and feature is ALL about west?!?

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sealioning

Integration as external modules
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Similar to optional modules, but added to the zephyr project as an entry in the

Reviewer 5: zephyr -> Zephyr
This sentence may be a bit difficult to read. The whole paragraph feels like it could be rewritten for clarity.

inactive manifest file. Such modules can reside outside the Zephyr project and
the information provided in the inactive manifest will only be used to list

> such modules in the docs for more exposure and awareness.

Reviewer 2: Since this is documentation, why is this captured in a manifest file rather than simply an RST?

Author: yes, this could be just an index of rst files with module information following some template.

thus it is not automatically subject to the requirements of the previous
section.

Integration in main manifest file (west.yaml)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Integrating external code into the main :file:`west.yml` manifest file is
limited to code that is used by a Zephyr subsystem (libraries), by a platform,
drivers (HAL) or tooling needed to test or build Zephyr components.

The integration of modules in this group is validated by the Zephyr project CI,

> and verified to be working with each Zephyr release.

Reviewer: Can you add language similar to what was discussed in the Process WG. https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/issues/46135#issuecomment-1717990887

Specifically some language that indicates "integrated modules will not be removed from the tree without a detailed migration plan".

drivers (HAL) or tooling needed to test or build Zephyr components.

The integration of modules in this group is validated by the Zephyr project CI,
and verified to be working with each Zephyr release.

Integrated modules will not be removed from the tree without a detailed
migration plan.

Integration as optional modules
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Standalone or loose integration of modules/projects without any incoming
dependencies shall be made optional and shall be kept standalone. Optional
projects that provide value to users directly and through a Zephyr subsystem or
platform shall be added to an optional manifest file that is filtered by
default. (:file:`submanifests/optional.yml`).

Such optional projects might include samples and tests in their own repositories.

There shall not be any direct dependency added in the Zephyr code tree (Git
repository) and all sample or test code shall be maintained as part of the module.

.. note::

   This is valid for all new optional modules. Existing optional modules with
   samples and test code in the Zephyr Git repository will be transitioned out
   over time.

Integration as external modules
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Similar to optional modules, but added to the Zephyr project as an entry in the
> documentation using a pre-defined template. This type of modules exists outside the
> Zephyr project manifest with documentation instructing users and developers how
> to integrate the functionality.
> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Similar to optional modules, but added to the Zephyr project as an entry in the
documentation using a pre-defined template. These type of modules exists outside the
Zephyr project manifest. External modules are responsible for providing
documentation instructing users and developers how the module may be used with
Zephyr.
```

sample or test code shall be maintained within the module tree.

Integration as external modules

> +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Reviewer 3: looks like it's fixed later, please amend original commit
